# Papitzer-Lachen---Variability-in-plant-species-composition
## Analysis of the variability in plant species composition in the floodplain meadows 'Papitzer Lachen', Saxony, Germany.

## Abstract

<div style="text-align: justify">
Floodplains are among the most complex and species-rich habitats on earth. They fulfil essential ecosystem services, including carbon storage, water supply, erosion control and providing habitat for fauna and flora, making them of great importance to the global context. However, particularly floodplain meadows, which harbour a variety of endangered plant species, are declining. In Germany, their total surface has decreased by over 80% since the 1950s. This is mainly due to human interference through e.g. river channelisation and embankment, resulting in changes of the nutrient and pollutant input, land use or intensification. These processes of change and their effects on vegetation in floodplain meadows have not yet been sufficiently studied, as they have mostly taken place in recent decades. This study investigates spatial vegetation patterns in the floodplain meadows ‘Papitzer Lachen’ near Leipzig, Germany. Specifically, it analyses statistical variability in recorded vegetation data in relation to environmental variables, conducting a detrended correspondence analysis. The main explanatory factor for patterning the vegetation appears to be moisture. Particularly, terrain elevation, with specifically the factors of the groundwater-surface distance and the thickness of the alluvial clay layer, shows a significant negative correlation with the first ordination axis (r = -0.54; p < 0.05). The distance to the next water body is not as relevant. Further important factors, which have not been considered quantitatively, are the soil substrate, nutrient balance and land use. The results indicate that, due to modifications of the hydrological budget and land use changes, the vegetation in the floodplain meadows is undergoing changes. In order to sufficiently evaluate these changes and their impact on ecosystem services, further research is required.
</div>
